Service is not possible unless it is rooted in love or Ahimsa. True love is boundless like the ocean and rising and swelling within one spreads itself out and crossing all boundaries and frontiers envelops the whole world. This service is again impossible without bread labour, otherwise described in the Gita as Yajna. It is only when a man or woman has done bodily labour for the sake of service that he or she has the right to live.@  
All our activities should be centered in Truth. Truth should be the very breath of our life. When once this stage in the pilgrim's progress is reached, all other rules of correct living will come without effort, and obedience to them will be instinctive. But without Truth it is impossible to observe any principles or rules in life.@  
They say, 'means are after all means.' I would say, 'means are after all everything.' As the means so the end. There is no wall of separation between the means and the end. Indeed the Creator has given us control (and that too very limited) over means, none over the end. Realization of the goal is in exact proportion to that of the means. This is a proposition that admits of no exception.@  
Everything in India attracts me. It has everything that a human being with the highest possible aspirations can want.@  
India is essentially karmabhumi (land of duty) in contradistinction to bhogabhumi (land of enjoyment).@  
India is one of the few nations on the earth which have retained some of their ancient institutions although they have been overlaid with superstition and error. But she has hitherto shown an inherent capacity for purging herself of error and superstition. My faith in her ability to solve the economic problems that face her millions has never been so bright as it is today.@  
I feel that India's mission is different from that of others. India is fitted for the religious supremacy of the world. There is no parallel in the world for the process of purification that this country has voluntarily undergone. India is less in need of steel weapons, it has fought with divine weapons, it can still do so. @  
My religion has no geographical limits. If I have a living faith in it, it will transcend my love for India herself. My life is dedicated to service of India through the religion of nonviolence.@  
I am wedded to India because I owe my all to her. I believe absolutely that she has a mission for all the world.@  
I would like to see India free and strong so that she may offer herself a willing and pure sacrifice for the betterment of the world. India's freedom must revolutionize the world's outlook upon peace and war.@  
I cling to India like a child to its mother's breast, because I feel that she gives me the spiritual nourishment I need. She has the environment that responds to my highest aspirations. When that faith is gone, I shall feel like an orphan without hope of ever finding a guardian.@  
Wisdom is no monopoly of one continent or one race.@  
I shall strive for a constitution, which will release India from all thraldom and patronage, and give her, if need be, the right to sin. I shall work for an India, in which the poorest shall feel that it is their country in whose making they have an effective voice; an India in which there shall be no high class and low class of people; an India in which all communities shall live in perfect harmony. There can be no room in such an India for the curse of untouchability or the curse of the intoxicating drinks and drugs. Women will enjoy the same rights as men. Since we shall be at peace with all the rest of the world, neither exploiting, nor being exploited, we should have the smallest army imaginable. All interests not in conflict with the interests of the dumb millions will be scrupulously respected, whether foreign or indigenous. Personally, I hate distinction between foreign and indigenous. This is the India of my dreams...I shall be satisfied with nothing else.@  
The word Swaraj is a sacred word, a Vedic word, meaning self-rule and self-restraint, and not freedom from all restraint which 'independence' often means.@  
By Swaraj I mean the government of India by the consent of the people as ascertained by the largest number of the adult population, male or female, native-born or domiciled, who have contributed by manual labour to the service of the State and who have taken the trouble of having registered their names as voters...Real Swaraj will come not by the acquisition of authority by a few but by the acquisition of the capacity by all to resist authority when it is abused. In other words, Swaraj is to be obtained by educating the masses to a sense of their capacity to regulate and control authority.@  
There is an indefinable mysterious Power that pervades everything. I feel it though I do not see it. It is this unseen Power which makes itself felt and yet defies all proof, because it is so unlike all that I perceive through my senses. It transcends the senses. But it is possible to reason out the existence of God to a limited extent.@  
God tries His votaries through and through, but never beyond endurance. He gives them strength   enough to go through the ordeal He prescribes for them. @  
I do dimly perceive that whilst everything around me is ever-changing, everdying, there is underlying all that change a Living Power that is changeless, that holds all together, that creates, dissolves, and re-creates. That informing Power or Spirit is God. And since nothing else I see merely through the senses can or will persist, He alone is.@  
And is this Power benevolent or malevolent? I see it as purely benevolent. For I can see that in the midst of death life persists, in the midst of untruth truth persists, in the midst of darkness light persists, Hence I gather that God is Life, Truth, Light, He is Love, He is the Supreme Good.@  
I cannot account for the existence of evil by any rational method. To want to do so is to be co-equal with God. I am, therefore, humble enough to recognize evil as such; and I call God long-suffering and patient precisely because He permits evil in the world.@  
We do not know all the laws of God nor their working. Knowledge of the tallest scientist or the greatest spiritualist is like a particle of dust. If God is not a personal being for me like my earthly father, He is infinitely more. He rules me in the tiniest detail of my life. I believe literally that not a leaf moves but by His will. Every breath I take depends upon His sufferance.@  
He and His Law are one. The Law is God. Anything attributed to Him is not a mere attribute. He is the attribute. He is Truth, Love and Law and a million other things that human ingenuity can name.@  
To me God is Truth and Love; God is ethics and morality; God is fearlessness. God is the source of Light and Life and yet He is above and beyond all these. God is conscience. He is even the atheism of the atheist. For in His boundless love God permits the atheist to live.@  
He is a personal God to those who need His personal presence. He is embodied to those who need His touch. He is the purest essence. He simply is to those who have faith. He is all things to all men. He is in us and yet above and beyond us.@  
He cannot cease to be because hideous immoralities or inhuman brutalities are committed in His name. He is long-suffering. He is patient but He is also terrible. He is the most exacting personage in the world and the world to come. He metes out the same measure to us that we mete out to our neighbours-men and brutes. With Him ignorance is no excuse. And withal He is ever forgiving for He always gives us the chance to repent.@  
God is not outside this earthly case of ours. Therefore, exterior proof is not of much avail, if any at all. We must ever fail to perceive Him through the senses, because He is beyond them. We can feel Him, if we will but withdraw ourselves from the senses. The divine music is incessantly going on within ourselves. But the loud senses drown the delicate music, which is unlike and infinitely superior to anything we can perceive or hear with our senses.@  
God is the hardest taskmaster I have known on this earth, and He tries you through and through. And when you find your faith is failing or your body is failing you, and you are sinking, He comes to your assistance somehow or other and proves to you that you must not lose your faith and that He is always at your beck and call, but on His terms, not on your terms. So I have found. I cannot really recall a single instance when, at the eleventh hour, He has forsaken me.@  
The divine guidance often comes when the horizon is the blackest.@  
God helps when one feels oneself humbler than the very dust under one's feet. Only to the weak and helpless is divine succour vouchsafed.@  
God helps when one feels oneself humbler than the very dust under one's feet. Only to the weak and helpless is divine succour vouchsafed.@  
Mankind is notoriously too dense to read the signs that God sends from time to time. We require drums to be beaten into our ears, before we would wake from our trance and hear the warning and see that to lose oneself in all is the only way to find oneself. @  
If you would ask Him to help you, you would go to Him without reservations, also without fear or doubts as to how He can help a fallen being like you. He who has helped millions who have approached Him, is He going to desert you? @  
Man's ultimate aim is the realization of God, and all his activities, social, political, religious, have to be guided by the ultimate aim of the vision of God. The immediate service of all human beings becomes a necessary part of the endeavour, simply because the only way to find God is to see Him in His creation and be one with it. This can only be done by service of all. I am a part and parcel of the whole, and I cannot find Him apart from the rest of humanity. @  
God is a very hard taskmaster. He is never satisfied with fireworks display. His mills although they grind surely and incessantly grind  excruciatingly slow and He is never satisfied with hasty forfeitures of life. It is a sacrifice of the purest that He demands, and so you and I have prayerfully to plod on, live out the life so long as it is vouchsafed to us to live it. @  
God keeps an accurate record of all things good and bad. There is no better accountant on earth.@  
If God was a capricious person instead of being the changeless, unchangeable living law, He would in sheer indignation wipe out those who in the name of religion deny Him and His Law. @  
God to be God must rule the heart and transform it. He must express Himself in every smallest act of His votary. This can only be done through a definite realization more real than the five senses can ever produce.@  
Where there is realization outside the senses it is infallible. It is proved not by extraneous evidence but in the transformed conduct and character of those who have felt the real presence of God within. Such testimony is to be found in the experiences of an unbroken line of prophets and sages in all countries and climes. To reject this evidence is to deny oneself.@  
But it is impossible for us to realize perfect Truth so long as we are imprisoned in this mortal frame. We can only visualize it in our imagination. We cannot, through the instrumentality of this ephemeral body, see face to face Truth which is eternal. That is why in the last resort we must depend on faith.  @  
No one can attain perfection while he is in the body for the simple reason that the ideal state is impossible so long as one has not completely overcome his ego, and ego cannot be wholly got rid of so long as one is tied down by the shackles of the flesh. @  
Our existence as embodied beings is purely momentary; what are a hundred years in eternity? But if we shatter the chains of egotism, and melt into the ocean of humanity, we share it's dignity. To feel that we are something is to set up a barrier between God and ourselves; to cease feeling that we are something is to become one with God. @  
A drop in the ocean partakes of the greatness of it's parent, although it is unconscious  of it. But it is dried up as soon as it enters upon an existence independent of the ocean. We do not exaggerate when we say that life is a bubble. @  
As soon as we become one with the ocean in the shape of God, there is no more rest for us, nor indeed do we need rest any longer. Our very sleep is action. For we sleep with the thought of God in our hearts. This restlessness constitutes true rest. This never-ceasing agitation holds the key to peace ineffable. This supreme state of total surrender is difficult to describe, but not beyond the bounds of human experience. It has been attained by many dedicated souls, and may be attained by ourselves as well. @  
Where love is, there God is also. @  
Love never claims, it ever gives. Love ever suffers, never resents, never revenges itself. @  
I believe that the sum total of the energy of mankind is not to bring us down but to lift us up, and that is the result of the definite, if unconscious, working of the law of love. The fact that mankind persists shows that the cohesive force is greater than the disruptive force, centripetal force greater than centrifugal. @  
Scientists tell us that without the presence of the cohesive force amongst the atoms that comprise this globe of ours, it would crumble to pieces and we would cease to exist; and even as there is cohesive force in blind matter, so must there be in all things animate and the name for that cohesive force among animate beings is Love. @  
We notice it between father and son, between brother and sister, friend and friend. But we have to learn to use that force among all that lives, and in the use of it consists our knowledge of God. Where there is love there is life; hatred leads to destruction. @  
I have found that life persists in the midst of destruction and therefore there must be a higher law than that of destruction. Only under that law would a well-ordered society be intelligible and life worth living.@  
If love was not the law of life, life would not have persisted in the midst of death. Life is a perpetual triumph over the grave. @  
If there is a fundamental distinction between man and beast, it is the former's progressive recognition of the law and its application in practice to his own personal life. All the saints of the world, ancient and modern, were each according to his light and capacity a living illustration of that supreme Law of our Being.@  
The forms are many, but the informing spirit is one. How can there be room for distinctions of high and low where there is this all-embracing fundamental unity underlying the outward diversity? For that is a fact meeting you at every step in daily life. The final goal of all religions is to realize this essential oneness.@  
We must widen the circle of our love till it embraces the whole village; the village in its turn must take into its fold the district, the district the province, and so on till the scope of our love becomes coterminous with the world.@  
Man's nature is not essentially evil. Brute nature has been known to yield to the influence of love. You must never despair of human nature.@  
Not killing competition, but life-giving co-operation, is the law of the human being. Ignoring the emotion is to forget that man has feelings. Not the good of the few, not even good of the many, but it is the good of all that we are made to promote, if we are 'made in His own image'.@  
The golden rule of conduct...is mutual toleration, seeing that we will never all think alike and we shall always see Truth in fragment and from different angles of vision.@  
A seeker after Truth, a follower of the Law of Love, cannot hold anything against tomorrow. God never provides for the morrow. He never creates more than what is strictly needed from day to day. If, therefore, we repose faith in His Providence, we should rest assured that He will give us every day our daily bread, supplying enough that we require.@  
The rich have a superfluous store of things which they do not need and which are, therefore, neglected and wasted; while millions starve and are frozen to death for want of them. If each retained possession only of what he needed, none would be in want and all would live in contentment.                                                 @  
As it is, the rich are discontented no less than the poor. The poor man would become a millionaire and the millionaire a multi-millionaire. The poor are often not satisfied when thay get just enough to fill their stomachs; but they are clearly entitled to it and society should make it a point to see that they get it.@  
Our civilization, our culture, our Swaraj depend not upon multiplying our wants--self-indulgence, but upon restricting our wants--self-denial.@  
We should be ashamed of resting, or having a square meal so long as there is one able-bodied man or woman without work or food.@  
I suggest we are thieves in a way. If I take anything that I do not need for my own immediate use and keep it, I thieve it from somebody else. @  
I venture to suggest that it is the fundamental law of Nature, without exception, that Nature produces enough for our wants from day to day, and if only everybody took enough for himself and nothing more, there would be no pauperism in this world, there would be no man dying of starvation in this world.@  
I am no socialist and I do not want to dispossess those who have got possessions: but I do say that personally those of us who want to see light out of darkness have to follow this rule. I do not want to dispossess anybody. I should then be departing from the rule of Ahimsa. If somebody else possesses more than I do, let him. But so far as my own life has to be regulated, I dare not possess anything which I do not want.@  
In India we have got three millions of people who have to be satisfied with one meal a day, and that meal consisting of a chapati containing no fat in it and a pinch of salt. You and I have no right to anything that we really have until these three millions are clothed and fed better. You and I, who ought to know better, must adjust our wants, and even undergo voluntary starvation in order that they may be nursed, fed and clothed.@  
The golden rule...is resolutely to refuse to have what millions cannot. This ability to refuse will not descend upon us all of a sudden. The first thing is to cultivate the mental attitude that will not have possessions or facilities denied to millions, and the next immediate thing is to re-arrange our lives as fast as possible in accordance with that mentality.@  
One should eat not in order to please the palate, but just to keep the body going. When each organ of sense subserves the body and through the body the soul, its special relish disappears and then alone does it begin to function in the way nature intended it to do. Any number of experiments is too small and no sacrifice too great for attaining this symphony with nature.@  
We want healers of souls rather than of bodies. The multiplicity of hospitals and medical men is no sign of true civilization. The less we and others pamper our bodies the better for us and the world.@  
Instead of using the body as a temple of God we use it as a vehicle for indulgences and are not ashamed to run to medical men for help in our effort to increase them and abuse the earthly tabernacle.@  
God is certainly one.  He has no second.  He is unfathomable and unknown to the vast majority of mankind.  He is everywhere. He sees without eyes and hears without ears.  He is formless and indivisible.  He is uncreate, has no father, mother or child; yet he allows himself to be worshiped as father, mother, wife and child.  He allows himself even to worshipped as stock and stone, although he is none of these things.  He is the most elusive.  He is the nearest to us, if we could but know the fact.  But he is farthest from us when we do not want to realize his omnipresence.@  
Man's estate is one of probation. During that period he is played upon by evil forces as well as good. He is ever prey to temptations. He has to prove his manliness by resisting and fighting temptations.@  
I dispute that Hindus believe in many gods and are idolaters.  They do say that there are many gods, but they declare unmistakably that there is one god, the god of gods.  It is not, therefore, proper to suggest that Hindus believe in many gods.@  
It may be long before the law of love will be recognized in international affairs. The machineries of governments stand between and hide the hearts of one people from those of another.@  
Truth is like a vast tree, which yields more and more fruit, the more you nurture it. The deeper the search is in the mine of truth the richer the discovery of the gems buried there, in the shape of openings for an ever greater variety of service.@  
God is not some person outside ourselves or away from the universe.  He pervades everything and is omniscient as well as omnipotent.  He does not need any praise or petitions.  Being immanent in all beings, he hears everything and reads our innermost thoughts.  He abides in our hearts and is nearer to us that the nails on our fingers.
God is then not a person.  He is the all-pervading, all-powerful spirit.  Anyone who hears him in his heart has accession of a marvelous force or energy, comparable in its results to physical forces like steam or electricity but much more subtle.@  
The seeker after truth should be humbler than the dust. The world crushes the dust under its feet, but the seeker after truth should so humble himself that even the dust could crush him. Only then, and not until then, will he have a glimpse of truth.@  
Devotion to Truth is the sole reason for our existence. All our activities should be centred in Truth. Truth should be the very breath of our life. When once this stage in the pilgrim's progress is reached, all other rules of correct living will come without effort, and obedience to them will be instinctive. But without Truth it would be impossible to observe any principles or rules in life.@  
Again God lives, but not as we.  His creatures live but to die.  But God is life.  Therefore, goodness and all it connotes is not an attribute.  Goodness is God.  Goodness conceived as apart from him, is a lifeless thing....So are all morals.  If they are to live in us, they must be considered and cultivated in their relation to God.  We try to become good, because we want to reach and realize God.  All the dry ethics of the world turns to dust because apart from God they are lifeless.  Coming from God they come with life in them.  They become part of us and ennoble us.@  
There should be Truth in thought, Truth in speech, and Truth in action. To the man who has realized this Truth in perfection, nothing else remains to be known, because all knowledge is necessarily included in it. What is not included in it is not Truth and so not true knowledge; and there can be no inward peace without the true knowledge. If we once learn how to apply this never-failing test of Truth, we will at once be able to find out what is worth being, what is worth seeing and what is worth reading.@  
God is Sat-Chit-Ananda.
The word satya, truth, is derived from sat which means being.  And nothing is or exists in reality except truth.  That is why Sat, or Truth, is perhaps the most important name of God.  In fact, it is more correct to say truth is God than to say God is truth.  And where there is truth, there is also knowledge, which is truth.  Where there is no truth, there can be no true knowledge.  That is why the word chit, or knowledge, is associated with the name of God.  And where there is true knowledge, there is always bliss, ananda.  Sorrow has no place there.  And even as truth is eternal, so is Bliss derived from it.  Hence we know God as Sat-Chit-Ananda, one who combines in himself truth, knowledge and bliss.@  
The quest of Truth involves tapas-- self-suffering, sometimes even unto death. There can be no place in it for even a trace of self-interest. In such selfless search for Truth nobody can lose his bearings for long. Directly one takes to the wrong path one stumbles and is thus redirected to the right path. Therefore the pursuit of Truth is true bhakti (devotion). It is the path that leads to God and therefore there is no place in it for cowardice, no place for defeat. It is the talisman by which death itself becomes the portal to life eternal.@  
It is not given to man to know the whole Truth. His duty lies in living up to the Truth as he sees it and in doing so to resort to the purest means, i.e. to non-violence.@  
If observance of truth was a bed of roses, if truth cost one nothing and was all happiness and ease, there would be no beauty about it. We must adhere to truth even if the heavens should fall.@  
Only Truth quenches untruth, Love quenches anger, self-suffering quenches violence. This eternal rule is a rule not for saints only but for all. Those who observe it may be few but they are the salt of the earth, it is they who keep the society together, not those who sin against light and truth.@  
Abstract truth has no value, unless it incarnates in human beings who represent it by proving their readiness to die for it. Our wrongs live because we only pretend to be their living representatives. The only way we can prove our claim is by readiness to suffer in the discharge of our trust.@  
A man of truth must ever be confident, if he has also equal need to be diffident. His devotion to truth demands the fullest confidence. His consciousness of the human nature must make him humble and therefore ever ready to retrace his steps immediately he discovers his error. @  
God is an idea, Law himself....He and his law abide everywhere and govern everything.  Therefore, though I do not think that he answers in every detail every request of ours, there is no doubt that he rules our actions, and I literally believe that not a blade of grass grows or moves without his will.@  
He allows us freedom and yet his compassion commands obedience to his will.  But if anyone of us disdains to bow to his will, he says, \So be it.  My sun will shine no less for thee.  My clouds will rain no less for thee.  I need not force thee to accept my sway.\&quot;  Of such a God let the ignorant dispute the existence.  I am one of the millions of wise men who believe in him and am never tired of bowing to him and singing his glory.&quot;@  
There is only one omnipotent and omnipresent God.  He is named variously and we remember him by the name which is most familiar to us.  Each person can choose the name that appeals most to him.  Ishwara, Allah, Khuda, God mean the same.@  
God is not a person.  To affirm that he descends to earth every now and again in the form of a human being is a partial truth, which merely signifies that such a person lives near to God.  Inasmuch as God is omnipresent; he dwells within every human being and all may therefore, be said to be incarnations of him.  But this leads nowhere.  Rama, Krishna, etc., are called incarnations of God because we attribute divine qualities to them.  Whether they actually lived or not does not affect the picture of them in man's mind.@  
Finite human beings shall never know in its fullness Truth and Love which is in itself infinite. But we do know enough for our guidance. We shall err, and sometimes grievously, in our application. But man is a self-governing being, and self-government necessarily includes the power as much to commit errors as to set them right as often as they are made. @  
I believe that if in spite of the best of intentions one is led into committing mistakes they do not really result in harm to the world or for the matter of that any individual. God always saves the world from the consequences of unintended errors of men who live in fear of Him.@  
To err, even grievously, is human. But it is human only if there is determination to mend the error and not to repeat it. The error will be forgotten if the promise is fully redeemed. @  
There is no one without faults, not even men of God. They are men of God not because they are faultless but because they know their own faults, they strive against them, they do not hide them and are ever ready to correct themselves. @  
Confession of error is like a broom that sweeps away dirt and leaves the surface cleaner than before.@  
Truth is not truth merely because it is ancient. Nor is it necessarily to be regarded with suspicion, because it is ancient. There are some fundamentals of life which may not be lightly given up because they are difficult of enforcement in one's life.@  
Rationalists are admirable beings, rationalism is a hideous monster when it claims for itself omnipotence. Attribution of omnipotence to reason is as bad a piece of idolatry as is worship of stock and stone believing it to be God. @  
Change is a condition of progress. An honest man cannot afford to observe mechanical consistency when the mind revolts against anything as an error.








@  
I make no hobgoblin of consistency. If I am true to myself from moment to moment, I do not mind all the inconsistencies that may be flung in my face.@  
There is a consistency that is wise and a consistency that is foolish. A man who in order to be consistent would go barebodied in the hot sun of India and sunless Norway in mid-winter would be considered a fool and would lose his life in the bargain.@  
Human life is a series of compromises and it is not always easy to achieve in practice what one has found to be true in theory.@  
There are eternal principles which admit of no compromise and one must be prepared to lay down one's life in the practice of them.@  
. . . one should speak the truth in gentle language. One had better not speak it, if one cannot do so in a gentle way; meaning thereby that there is no truth in a man who cannot control his tongue.@  
The pursuit of Truth is true \bhakti\&quot; (devotion). It is the path that leads to God@  
From the standpoint of pure Truth, the body too is a possession. It has been truly said, that desire for enjoyments create bodies for the soul. When this desire vanishes, there remains no further need for the body, and man is free from the vicious circle of births and deaths.@  
How beautiful it would be, if all of us, men and women, devoted ourselves wholly to Truth in all that we might do in our waking hours, whether working, eating, drinking, or playing, till dissolution of the body makes us one with Truth?@  
We may not be God, but we are of God even as a little drop of water is of the ocean.  We become helpless if torn away form the ocean. But when reminded that we are the ocean, our faith is revived and we dance with joy and the whole of the might and majesty of the universe is reflected from us. @  
It is clear to me as daylight that life and death are but phases of the same thing, the reverse and obverse of the same coin.  In fact, tribulation and death seem to me to present a phase far richer than happiness or life...I want you all to treasure death and suffering more than life, and to appreciate their cleansing and purifying character.@  
Death is at any time blessed, but it is twice blessed for a warrior who dies for his cause, i.e. truth.  Death is no fiend, he is the truest of friends...He ever gives us new chances, new hopes...It is customary to mourn when a friend dies.  The custom has no operation when the death is that of a martyr.@  
Nations cohere because there is mutual regard among the individuals composing them.  Some day we must extend the nation law to the universe, even as we have extended the family law to form nations-a larger family.@  
Where there is no Truth, there can be no true knowledge. That is why the word \Chit\&quot;or knowledge is associated with the name of God. And where there is true knowledge@  
Silence is a great help to a seeker after truth. In the attitude of silence the soul finds the path in a clearer light and what is elusive and deceptive resolves itself into crystal clearness. Our life is a long and arduous quest after Truth, and the soul requires inward restfulness to attain its full height.@  
Tolerance gives us spiritual insight, which is as far from fanaticism as the north pole from the south. True knowledge of religion breaks down the barriers between faith and faith.@  
Experience has taught me that silence is a part of the spiritual discipline of a votary of truth. Proneness to exaggerate, to suppress or modify the truth wittingly or unwittingly, is a natural weakness of man, and silence is necessary in order to surmount it. A man of few words will rarely be thoughtless in his speech; he will measure every word.@  
Religions are different roads converging upon the same point. What does it matter that we take different roads so long as we reach the same goal?@  
Belief in one God is the cornerstone of all religions. But I do not foresee a time when there would be only one religion on earth in practice. In theory, since there is one God, there can be only one religion. But in practice, no two persons I have known have had the same identical conception of God. Therefore, there will perhaps always be different religions answering to different temperaments and climatic conditions.@  
I believe in the fundamental truth of all great religions of the world. I believe that they are all God given and I believe that they were necessary for the people to whom these religions were revealed. And I believe that if only we could all of us read the scriptures of the different faiths from the standpoint of the followers of these faiths, we should find that they were at the bottom all one and were all helpful to one another.@  
I believe that all the great religions of the world are true more or less. I say 'more of less' because I believe that everything that the human hand touches by reason of the very fact that human beings are imperfect becomes imperfect.@  
Perfection is the exclusive attribute of God and it is indescribable, untranslatable. I do believe that it is possible for every human being to become perfect even as God is perfect. It is necessary for all of us to aspire after perfection, but when that blessed state is attained, it becomes indescribable, indefinable.@  
If we had attained the full vision of Truth, we would no longer be mere seekers, but would have become one with God, for Truth is God. But being only seekers we prosecute our quest and are conscious of our imperfection. And if we are imperfect ourselves, religion as conceived by us must also be imperfect.@  
We have not realized religion in its perfection, even as we have not realized God. Religion of our conception, being thus imperfect, is always subject to a process of evolution and re-interpretation. Progress towards Truth, towards God, is possible only because of such evolution. And if all faiths outlined by men are imperfect, the question of comparative merit does not arise.@  
All faiths constitute a revelation of Truth but all are imperfect, and liable to error. Reverence for other faiths need not blind us to their faults. We must be keenly alive to the defects of our own faith also, yet not leave it on that account, but try to overcome those defects. Looking at all religions with an equal eye, we would not only not hesitate, but would think it our duty, to blend into our faith every acceptable feature of other faiths.@  
Even as a tree has a single trunk but many branches and leaves, so there is one true and perfect religion but it becomes many, as it passes through the human medium.@  
I came to the conclusion long ago, after prayerful search and study and discussion with as many people as I could meet, that all religions were true and also that all had some error in them, and that whilst I hold by my own, I should hold others as dear as Hinduism, from which it logically follows that we should hold all as dear as our nearest kith and kin and that we should make no distinction between them.@  
The one religion is beyond all speech. Imperfect men put it into such language as they can command, and their words are interpreted by other men equally imperfect. Whose interpretation is to be held to be the right one? Everybody is right from his own standpoint, but it is not impossible that everybody is wrong. Hence the necessity of tolerance, which does not mean indifference to one's own faith, but a more intelligent and purer love for it.@  
It is not necessary for toleration that I must approve of what I tolerate. I heartily dislike drinking, meat-eating and smoking, but I tolerate these in Hindus, Mahomedans and Christians, even as I expect them to tolerate my abstinence from all these, although they may dislike it.@  
Religion which takes no account of practical affairs and does not help to solve them is no religion.@  
I do not know any religion apart from human activity. It provides a moral basis to all other activities which they would otherwise lack, reducing life to a maze of 'sound and fury signifying nothing'.@  
For me, politics bereft of religion is absolute dirt ever to be shunned. Politics concern nations and that which concerns the welfare of nations must be one of the concerns of a man who is religiously inclined, in other words a seeker after God and Truth.@  
For me, God and Truth are convertible terms and if anyone told me that God was a god of untruth or a god of torture I would decline to worship him. Therefore, in politics also we have to establish the Kingdom of Heaven.@  
A good Hindu or a good Musalman should be a better Hindu or a better Musalman for being a lover of his country. There never can be any conflict between the real interest of one's country and that of one's religion. Where there appears to be any there is something wrong with one's religion, i.e. one's morals. True religion means good thought and good conduct. True patriotism also means good thought and good conduct. To set up a comparison between two synonymous things is wrong.@  
We the human family are not all philosophers. We are of the earth very earthy, and we are not satisfied with contemplating the Invisible God. Somehow or other we want something which we can touch, something which we can see, something before which we can kneel down. It does not matter whether it is a book, or an empty stone building or a stone building inhabited by numerous figures. A book will satisfy some, an empty building will satisfy some others, and many others will not be satisfied unless they see something inhabiting these empty buildings.@  
It depends on our mental condition whether we gain something or do not gain something by going to the temples. We have to approach these temples in a humble and penitent mood. They are so many homes of God. Of course God resides in every human form, indeed every particle of His creation, everything that is on this earth. But since we very fallible mortals do not appreciate the fact that God is everywhere we impute special sanctity to temples and think that God resides there.@  
When we approach these temples we must cleanse our bodies, our minds and our hearts and we should enter them in a prayerful mood and ask God to make us purer men and purer women for having entered their portals. And if you will take this advice of an old man, this physical deliverance that you have secured will be a deliverance of the soul.@  
Bitter experience has taught me that all temples are not houses of God. They can be habitations of the devil. These places of worship have no value unless the keeper is a good man of God. Temples, mosques, churches are what man makes them to be.@  
If anyone doubts the infinite mercy of God, let him have a look at these sacred places. How much hypocrisy and irreligion does the Prince of Yogis suffer to be perpetrated in His holy name?@  
Churches, mosques and temples which cover so much hypocrisy and humbug and shut the poorest out of them seem but a mockery of God and His worship when one sees the eternally renewed temple of worship under the vast blue canopy inviting every one of us to real worship, instead of abusing His name by quarreling in the name of religion.@  
Untouchability poisons Hinduism as a drop of arsenic poisons milk.@  
Man if a fallible being. He can never be sure of his steps. What he may regard as answer to prayer may be an echo of his pride. For infallible guidance man has to have a perfectly innocent heart incapable of evil.@  
It (untouchability)  is to my mind a curse that has come to us and as long as that curse remains with us, so long I think we are bound to consider that every affliction that we labour under in this sacred land is a fit and proper punishment for this great and indelible crime that we are committing.@  
Shall we have not the vision to see that in suppressing a sixth (or whatever the number) of ourselves, we have depressed ourselves? No man takes another down a pit without descending into it himself and sinning in the bargain. It is not the suppressed that sin. It is the supppressor who has to answer for his crime against those whom he suppresses. @  
God does not punish directly. His ways are inscrutable. Who knows that all our woes are not due to that one black sin?@  
Swaraj is a meaningless term, if we desire to keep a fifth of India under perpetual subjection, and deliberately deny to them the fruits of national culture. We are seeking the aid of God in this great purifying movement, but we deny to the most deserving among His creatures the rights of humanity. Inhuman ourselves, we may not plead before the throne for deliverance from the inhumanity of others.@  
Prayer is the key of the morning and the bolt of the evening.@  
As food is necessary for the body, prayer is necessary for the soul. A man may be able to do without food, for a number of days-as MacSwiney did for over seventy days-But, believing in God, man cannot, should not, live a moment without prayer.@  
Prayer needs no speech. It is in itself independent  of any sensuous effort. I have not the slightest doubt that prayer is an unfailing means of cleansing the heart of passions. But it must be combined with the utmost humility.@  
Prayer needs no speech. It is in itself independent  of any sensuous effort. I have not the slightest doubt that prayer is an unfailing means of cleansing the heart of passions. But it must be combined with the utmost humility.@  
I am giving you a bit of my experience and that of my companions when I say that he who has experienced the magic of prayer may do without food for days together but not a single moment without prayer. For without prayer there is no inward peace.@  
Never own defeat in a sacred cause and make up your minds henceforth that you will be pure and that you will find a response from God. But God never answers the prayers of the arrogant, nor the prayers of those who bargain with Him.@  
I can give my own testimony and say that a heartfelt prayer is undoubtedly the most potent instrument that man possesses for overcoming cowardice and all other bad old habits. Prayer is an impossibility without a living faith in the presence of God within.@  
The prayer of even the most impure will be answered. I am telling this out of my personal experience, I have gone through the purgatory. Seek first the Kingdom of Heaven and everything will be added unto you.@  
Not until we have reduced ourselves to nothingness can we conquer the evil in us. God demands nothing less than complete self-surrender as the price for the only real freedom that is worth having. And when a man thus loses himself he immediately finds himself in the service of all that lives. It becomes his delight and his recreation. He is a new man, never weary of spending himself in the service of God's creation.@  
Our prayer is a heart search. It is a reminder to ourselves that we are helpless without His support. No effort is complete without prayer--without a definite recognition that the best human endeavour is of no effect if it has not God's blessing behind. Prayer is a call to humility. It is a call to self-purification, to inward search. @  
There are limits to the capacity of an individual and the moment he flatters himself that he can undertake all tasks, God is there to humble his pride.@  
Let everyone try and find that as a result of daily prayer he adds something new to his life, something with which nothing can be compared.@  
There are subjects where reason cannot take us far and we have to accept things on faith. Faith then does not contradict reason but transcends it. Faith is a kind of sixth sense which works in cases which are without the purview of reason.@  
Without faith this world would come to naught in a moment. True faith is appropriation of the reasoned experience of people whom we believe to have lived a life purified by prayer and penance. Belief therefore in prophets or incarnations who have lived in remote ages is not an idle superstition but a satisfaction of an inmost spiritual want.@  
A man without faith is like a drop thrown out of the ocean bound to perish. Every drop in the ocean shares its majesty  and has the honour of giving us the ozone of life.@  
Faith is a function of the heart. It must be enforced by reason. The two are not antagonistic as some think. The more intense one's faith is, the more it whets one's reason. When faith becomes blind it dies.@  
It is faith that steers us through stormy seas, faith that moves mountains and faith that jumps across the ocean. That faith is nothing but a living, wide-awake consciousness of God within. He who has achieved that faith wants nothing. Bodily diseased, he is spiritually healthy; physically poor, he rolls in spiritual riches.@  
I am a man of faith. My reliance is solely on God. One step is enough for me. The next step He will make clear to me when time for it comes.@  
That faith is of little value which can flourish only in fair weather. Faith in order to be of any value has to survive the severest trials. Your faith is a whited sepulchre if it cannot stand the calumny of the whole world.@  
Faith is not a delicate flower which would wither under the slightest stormy weather. Faith is like the Himalaya mountains which cannot possibly change. No storm can possibly remove the Himalaya mountains from their foundation....And I want every one of you to cultivate that faith in God and religion.@  
If we have faith in us, if we have a prayerful heart, we may not tempt God, may not make terms with Him. We must reduce ourselves to a cipher.@  
There is a divine purpose behind every physical calamity. That perfected science will one day be able to tell us beforehand when earthquakes will occur, as it tells us today of eclipses, is quite possible. It will be another triumph of the human mind. But such triumphs even indefinitely multiplied can bring about no purification of self without which nothing is of any value.@  
This earthly existence of ours is more brittle than the glass bangle that ladies wear. You can keep glass bangles for thousands of years if you treasure them in a chest and let them remain untouched. But this earthly existence is so fickle that it may be wiped out in the twinkling of an eye. Therefore while we get breathing time, let us get rid of the distinctions of high and low purify our hearts and be ready to face our Maker when an earthquake or some natural calamity or death in the ordinary course overtakes us.@  
Death, which is an eternal verity, is revolution, as birth and after is slow and steady evolution.Death is as necessary for a man's growth as life itself.@  
Death is no fiend, he is the truest of friends. He delivers us from agony. He helps us against ourselves. He ever gives us new chances, new hopes. He is like sleep a sweet restorer.@  
It is as clear to me as daylight that life and death are but phases of the same thing, the reverse and obverse of the same coin. In fact tribulation and death seem to me to present a phase far richer than happiness or life. What is life worth without trials and tribulation which are the salt of life?@  
My religion teaches me that whenever there is distress which one cannot remove, one must fast and pray.@  
There is nothing so powerful as fasting and prayer that would give us the requisite discipline, spirit of self-sacrifice, humility and resoluteness of will without which there can be no real progress.@  
Fasting is a potent weapon in the Satyagraha armoury. It cannot be taken by everyone. Mere physical capacity to take it is no qualification for it. It is no use without a living faith in God. It should never be a mechanical effort nor a mere imitation. It must come from the depth of one's soul.@  
One fasts for health's sake under laws governing health, fasts as a penance for a wrong done and felt as such. In these fasts, the fasting one need not believe in ahimsa. There is, however, a fast which every votary of non-violence sometimes feels impelled to undertake by way of protest against some wrong done by society and this he does when he as a votary of ahimsa has no other remedy left.@  
A complete fast is a complete and literal denial of self. It is the truest prayer. 'Take my life and let it be always, only, all for Thee' is not, should not be, a mere lip or figurative expression. It has to be a reckless and joyous giving without the least reservation. Abstention from food and even water is but the mere beginning, the least part of the surrender.@  
If we realized the presence of God as witness to all we say and do we would not have anything to conceal from anybody on earth. For we would not think unclean thoughts before our Maker, much less speak them. It is uncleanness that seeks secrecy and darkness.@  
The tendency of human nature is to hide dirt, we do not want to see or touch dirty things; we want to put them out of sight. And so must it be with our speech. I would suggest that we should avoid even thinking thoughts we would hide from the world.@  
Whanever you do, be true to yourselves and to the world. Hide not your thoughts. If it is shameful to reveal them, it is more shameful to think them.@  
All sins are committed in secrecy. The moment we realize that God witnesses even our thoughts we shall be free.@  
Control over thought is a long and painful and laborious process. But I am convinced that no time, no labour and no pain is too much for the glorious result to be reached. The purity of thought is possible only with a faith in God bordering on definite experience.@  
When your passions threaten to get the better of you, go down on your knees and cry out to God for help. Ramanama is my infallible Help.@  
Let every aspirant after a pure life take from me that and impure thought is often as powerful in undermining the body as an impure act.@  
The potency of thought unsuppressed but unembodied is far greater than that of thought embodied that is translated into action. And when the action is brought under due control, it reacts upon and regulates the thought itself. Thought thus translated into action becomes a prisoner and is brought under subjection.@  
Always aim at complete harmony of thought and word and deed. Always aim at purifying you thoughts and everything will be well. There is nothing more potent than thought. Deed follows word and word follows thought. The world is the result of a mighty thought and where the thought is mighty and pure the result is always mighty and pure.@  
Man often becomes what he believes himself to be. If I keep on saying to myself that I cannot do a certain thing, it is possible that I may end by really becoming incapable of doing it. On the contrary, if I have the belief that I can do it, I shall surely acquire the capacity to do it even if I may not have it at the beginning.@  
Prayerfull well-meaning effort never goes in vain and man's success lies only in such an effort. The result is in His hands.@  
'Be thou certain, none can perish, trusting Me,' says the Lord, but let it not be understood to mean that our sins will be washed away by merely trustin Him without any striving. Only he who struggles hard against the allurements of sense objects and turns in tears and grief to the Lord will be comforted.@  
It is easy enough to say, 'I do not believe in God.'  For God permits all things to be said of Him with impunity  He looks at our acts.  And any breach of His Law carries with it, not its vindictive, but its purifying, compelling, punishment.@  
The path of self-purification is hard and steep.  To attain to perfect purity one has to become absolutely passion-free in thought, speech and action; to rise above the opposing currents of love and hatred, attachment and repulsion.@  
I believe that a healthy soul should inhabit a healthy body.   To the extent, therefore, that the soul grows into health and freedom from passion, to that extent the body also grows into that state.@  
Cleanliness is next to godliness.  We can no more gain God's blessings with an unclean body than with an unclean mind. A clean body cannot reside in an unclean city.@  
Restraint never ruins one's health. What ruins one's health is not restraint but outward suppression.  A really self-restrained person grows every day from strength to strength and from peace to more peace. The very first step in self-restraint is the restraint of thoughts.@  
An innocent youth is a priceless possession not to be squandered away for the sake of a momentary excitement, miscalled pleasure.@  
Steam becomes a mighty power only when it allows itself to be imprisoned in a strong little reservoir and produces tremendous motion and carries huge weight by permitting itself a tiny and measured outlet. Even so have the youth of the country of their own free to allow their inexhaustible energy to be imprisoned, controlled and set free in strictly measured and required quantities.@  
As a splendid palace deserted by its inmates looks like a ruin, so does a man without character, all his material belongings notwithstanding.@  
All our learning or recitation of the Vedas, correct knowledge of Sanskrit, Latin, Greek and what not will avail us nothing if they do not enable us to cultivate absolute purity of heart. The end of all knowledge must be building up of character.@  
Knowledge without character is a power for evil only, as seen in the instances of so many 'talented thieves' and 'gentleman rascals' in the world.@  
Drugs and drink are the two arms of the devil with which he strikes his helpless victims into stupefaction and intoxication.@  
When Satan comes disguised  as a champion of liberty, civilization, culture and the like, he makes himself almost irresistible.@  
People drink because of the conditions to which they are reduced. It is the factory labourers and others that drink. They are forlorn, uncared for and they take to drink. They are no more vicious by nature than teetotallers are saints by nature. The majority of people are controlled by their environment. @  
Non-violence is the law of our species as violence is the law of the brute. The spirit lies dormant in the brute and he knows no law but that of physical might. The dignity of man requires obedience to a higher law--to the strength of the spirit.@  
Non-violence is an active force of the highest order. It is soul force or the power of Godhead within us. Imperfect man cannot grasp the whole of that essence--he would not be able to bear its full blaze, but even an infinitesimal fraction of it, when it becomes active within us, can work wonders.@  
The sun in the heavens fills the whole universe with its life-giving warmth. But if one went too near it, it would consume him to ashes. Even so, it is with Godhead. We become God-like to the extent we realize non-violence; but we can never become wholly God.@  
Non-violence is like radium in its action. An infinitesimal quantity of it embedded in a malignant growth, acts continuously, silently and ceaselessly till it has transformed the whole mass of the diseased tissue into a healthy one. Similarly, even a little of true non-violence acts in a silent, subtle, unseen way and leavens the whole society.@  
Non-violence is the greatest force at the disposal of mankind. It is mightier than the mightiest weapon of destruction devised by the ingenuity of man. Destruction is not the law of the humans.  Man lives freely by hin readiness to die, if need be, at the hands of his brother, never by killing him.  Every murder or other injury, no matter for what cause, committed or inflicted on another is a crime against humanity.@  
My creed of non-violence is an extremely active force.  It has no room for cowardice or even weakness.  There is hope for a violent man to be some day non-violent,  but there is none for a coward.  I have, therefore, said more than once...that if we do not know how to defend ourselves, our women and our places of worship by the force of suffering, i.e. non-violence, we must, if we are men, be at least able to defend all these by fighting.@  
My non-violence does admit of people who cannot or will not be non-violent holding and making effective use of arms.  Let me repeat for the thousandth time that non-violence is of the strongest, not of the weak.@  
No matter how weak a person is in body, if it is a shame to flee, he will stand his ground and die at his post.  This would be non-violence and bravery.  (If,) no matter how weak he is, he will use what strength he has in inflicting injury on his opponent, and die in the attempt. This is bravery, but not non-violence. If, when his duty is to face danger, he flees, it is cowardice.  In the first case the man will have love or charity in him.  In the second and third cases, there would be a dislike or distrust and fear.@  
If the best minds of the world have not imbibed the spirit of non-violence, they would have to meet gangsterism in the orthodox way.  But that would only show that we have not gone far beyond the law of the jungle, that we have not yet learnt to appreciate the heritage that God has given us, that, in spite of the teaching of Christianity which is 1900 years old and of Hinduism and Buddhism which are older, and even of Islam, we have not made much headway as human beings. But whilst I would understand the use of force by those who have not the spirit of non-violence in them I would have those who know non-violence to throw their whole weight in demonstrating that even gangsterism has to be met with non-violence.@  
Fearlessness is the first requisite of spirituality.  Cowards can never be moral.
@  
With Satya combined with Ahimsa, you can bring the world to your feet.  Satyagraha in its essence is nothing but the introduction of truth and gentleness in the political, i.e. the national life.@  
A Satyagrahi bids good-bye to fear. He is, therefore, never afraid of trusting the opponent. Even if the opponent plays him false twenty times, the Satyagrahi is ready to trust him the twenty-first time, for an implicit trust in human nature is the very essence of his creed.@  
A Satyagrahi is nothing if not instinctively law-abiding and it is his law-abiding nature which exacts from him implicit obedience to the highest law, that is the voice of conscience which overrides all other laws.@  
Satyagraha is gentle, it never wounds. It must not be the result of anger or malice. It is never fussy, never impatient, never vociferous. It is the direct opposite of compulsion. It was conceived as a complete substitute for violence.@  
It is a force that may be used by individuals as well as by communities. It may be used as well in political as in domestic affairs. Its universal applicability is a demonstration of its permanence and invincibility. It can be used alike by men, women and children. It is totally untrue to say that it is a force to be used only by the weak so long as they are not capable of meeting violence by violence.@  
This force is to violence and therefore to all tyranny, all injustice, what light is to darkness. In politics, its use is based upon the immutable maxim, that government of the people is possible only so long as they consent either consciously or unconsciously to be governed.@  
The hardest heart and the grossest ignorance must disappear before the rising sun of suffering without anger and without malice.@  
In every great cause it is not the number of fighters that counts but it is the quality of which they are made that becomes the deciding factor. The greatest men of the world have always stood alone.@  
Take the great prophets, Zoroaster, Buddha, Jesus, Mohammed--they stood alone like many others whom I can name. But they had living faith in themselves and their God, and believing as they did that God was on their side, they never felt lonely.@  
You may recall the occasion when pursued by a numerous enemy, Abu Bakr, who was accompanying the Prophet in his flight, trembled to think of their fate and said, 'Look at the number of enemies that is overtaking us. What shall we two do against these heavy odds?' Without a moment's reflection the Prophet rebuked his faithful companion by saying, 'No, Abu Bakr, we are three for God is with us!' Or take the invincible faith of Vibhishan and Prahlad. I want you to have that same living faith in yourselves and God. @  
All life in the flesh exists by some Himsa. Hence the highest religion has been defined by a negative word Ahimsa. The world is bound in a chain of destruction. In other words Himsa is an inherent necessity for life in the body. That is why a votary of Ahimsa always prays for ultimate deliverance from the bondage of flesh.@ 